{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2512
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red11\green76\blue180;\red34\green34\blue34;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red40\green40\blue40;\red17\green85\blue204;\red100\green42\blue143;\red66\green66\blue66;
\red2\green77\blue153;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c1961\c38824\c75686;\csgenericrgb\c13333\c13333\c13333;
\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c100000;\csgenericrgb\c15686\c15686\c15686;\csgenericrgb\c6667\c33333\c80000;\csgenericrgb\c39216\c16471\c56078;\csgenericrgb\c25882\c25882\c25882;
\csgenericrgb\c784\c30196\c60000;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\vieww28500\viewh17700\viewkind1
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Title: Health care delivery in India amid COVID-19 pandemic: Challenges and Opportunities\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Authors:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Pragati Hebbar, Angel Sudha, Vivek Dsouza, Latha Chilgod, Adhip Amin\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa293\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pragati Hebbar, PhD scholar and DBT/Wellcome Trust India Alliance Early Career Fellow \uc0\u8232 Address: 3009, II-A Main, 17th Cross, Krishna Rajendra Rd, Banashankari Stage II, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560070.      Telephone number: 080-26761322.                                         Email: \cf3 pragati@iphindia.org\cf2 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Angel Sudha, Research Officer                                           Address: 3009, II-A Main, 17th Cross, Krishna Rajendra Rd, Banashankari Stage II, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560070.      Telephone number: 080-26761322.                                         Email: \cf3 angelsudha@iphindia.org\cf2 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa293\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Vivek Dsouza, Research Officer                                         Address: 3009, II-A Main, 17th Cross, Krishna Rajendra Rd, Banashankari Stage II, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560070.     Telephone number: 080-26761322.                                          Email: \cf3 vivek@iphindia.org\cf2  \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lathadevi Chilgod, Research Consultant                             Address: 3009, II-A Main, 17th Cross, Krishna Rajendra Rd, Banashankari Stage II, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560070.       Telephone number: 080-26761322.                                          Email: \cf3 latha@iphindia.org\cf2 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Adhip Amin, Research Officer                                            Address: 3009, II-A Main, 17th Cross, Krishna Rajendra Rd, Banashankari Stage II, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560070.           Telephone number: 080-26761322.                                         Email: \cf3 adhip@iphindia.org\cf2 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 A state of competing interests and funding support: The authors have no competing interests to declare. No funding was received for this article but the authors time were supported by their respective projects as follows. Dr. Pragati Hebbar and Mr. Vivek Dsouza were supported for their time through the DBT/Wellcome Trust India Alliance Fellowship (IA/ CPHE/17/1/503338) awarded to Pragati. Mr. Adhip Amin was supported for his time through the DBT/Wellcome Trust India Alliance Fellowship (IA/CPHI/17/1/503346) awarded to Dr. Upendra Bhojani. Mrs. Angel Sudha was supported for her time through the Institute of Public Health (IPH) for institutional learning and professional development. Dr. Lathadevi was supported for her time through the National Health Systems Resource Centre (NHSRC) \'96 Innovations & Learning Centre. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Acknowledgements\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 \
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution of Mr. Praveen Rao who helped design Figure 1, and comments on a previous version of this article by Dr. Prashanth NS as part of peer review within IPH. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
The submission is not under consideration for publication in any other journal. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Main article with references:
\f1\b0 \

\f0\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \
In the initial days of the COVID-19 pandemic in India and attempts at containment measures, life seemed to have taken unpredictable paths for individuals requiring healthcare services. A neighbour in Maharashtra had fractured his left thigh bone, a relative in Karnataka had a fall and needed to see an orthopedician, a chronic diabetic and hypertensive cancer survivor was worried about continuing supply and access to his medications. Both trauma cases with comorbidities had to visit multiple places in pain and without much respite, to be ultimately sent home as health facilities were gearing up to cater to COVID-19, while the elderly cancer survivor was able to stock up his medications with the help of his son. The thought for this article arose as some of us discussed issues being faced by our contacts in accessing healthcare and the fear settling in amongst them about various health circumstances which might require care in such times. \
\
Pandemics are not new to humankind, there has been extensive documentation and learning from these experiences. Invariably our health systems take most of the brunt as it caters to existing workload and simultaneously attempts to cope with the sudden demand. In the wake of COVID-19, the global community is grappling with ways to contain the virus as new developments are unfolding rapidly. India experimented with a one-day curfew on 22\super nd\nosupersub  March 2020 following which on 24\super th\nosupersub  March, a 21-day complete nationwide lockdown was announced. The health and police departments in coordination with the state and central administration are steering the implementation of the lockdown. On April 14\super th\nosupersub  2020 the lockdown was extended till May 3\super rd\nosupersub  2020 with conditional relaxation in areas where the spread has been contained from April 20\super th\nosupersub \
\
As per estimates from the 2009 influenza pandemic: school closures, quarantine and social distancing are the most expensive interventions in terms of costs per death prevented, whereas surveillance, contact tracing and face masks were the least expensive interventions.(1) India attempted to operationalize several of these measures for controlling COVID-19 but how does an overburdened healthcare system cope with this additional urgent need? COVID-19 seems to have overtaken the functioning of health facilities and the lockdowns have added additional challenges to seek routine care. In our attempt to highlight the moral and ethical challenges in accessing care, we share the externalities of COVID-19 on healthcare systems in India, immediate effects of the lockdown, and possible ways of addressing COVID and non-COVID related healthcare needs.\
\
The question we are trying to understand is \'91What is the effect of COVID-19 on the access to health care systems in India? (for emergency care, conditions requiring face to face contact and recurrent follow ups). Searches were conducted in the first week of April 2020 using a variety of sources such as academic literature, media reports, social media and websites. These searches pointed us to several healthcare difficulties that people are facing  during times of this pandemic and the subsequent lockdown.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 What has been the response of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) as well as the major healthcare facilities to tackle non-COVID related healthcare needs?
\f1\b0 \
\
The Government at the national, state, district, and sub-district level swung into action activating existing systems, developing new systems, absorbing the rapidly changing guidelines, tapping on networks and resources. Figure 1 depicts a summary of the detailed guidelines for delivery of essential health services during COVID19 provided by the MoHFW on 14\super th\nosupersub  April 2020.(2) \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The first case in India was detected on 30\super th\nosupersub  January and lockdown attempted from 22\super nd\nosupersub  March while this guidance was published on 14\super th\nosupersub  April, impact of the delay in publishing this will be realised only in the coming days when the data from the health management information systems is reviewed and analysed. 
\f0\b \

\f1\b0 A search of following websites was conducted for guidelines related to healthcare service delivery - All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Christian Medical College and Hospital, HealthCare Global, Nephroplus, Clove, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Indian Medical Association, Indian Dental Association, Tata memorial hospital, Narayana health, Cloud nine, Apollo hospitals and MoHFW. A summary of the various guidelines issued for essential health services by these major healthcare organisations:\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 1.	Guidelines to have minimal visits to the facilities have been issued and the health facilities are encouraging the use of technology to keep social distancing amidst the pandemic via Tele /E consultation, team virtual consultations for OPD consultations.\
2.	Emergency services to function normally.\
3.	Few organisations have instructed for minimal visits to be made by a pregnant mother based on the mother\'92s condition and as per doctor\'92s advice.\
4.	Conditions requiring patients to come to the facility such as radiation therapy, chemotherapy and dialysis to be continued with necessary precautions to prevent COVID-19 transmission.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 Table 1 provides a detailed timeline of actions taken by the central and state governments in order to contain the infection.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 What are the challenges related to healthcare delivery amid COVID-19?\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 \
Comorbidities are known to increase the vulnerabilities and chances of fatality. Therefore, patients who do not need urgent care, but still require repeated contact with hospitals are in a double bind now. As not getting regularly checked up can exacerbate their ill health and make them more susceptible while going for regular check-ups to hospitals in COVID-19 times can probably increase their chance of contracting the virus. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Chronic conditions\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 As the COVID-19 pandemic intensifies, many hospitals are advising patients to defer their treatment. As per a media report on the 8th of April, a large cancer specialty hospital in Bengaluru had advised patients undergoing chemotherapy to postpone their treatment by a couple of weeks unless they faced any severe symptoms, to avoid infection to people with compromised immunities.(3)\super  \nosupersub Weighing risks of delaying treatment versus chances of contracting the infection with compromised immunity is a difficult one to make and with restricted access to care providers often patients might have to take such decisions themselves. This is, at core, an ethical question; a question of priority: just as healthcare systems in countries have to make a decision of how to distribute their scarce ventilators between and amongst COVID-19 patients. In addition to this, there are two further questions of priority: (a) when it comes to deciding how the limited resources of the healthcare system will be distributed between COVID and non-COVID patients whether, for instance, those who are afflicted with non-COVID conditions will be asked to resume with their suffering, and (b) whether the lockdown which is aimed at the population as a whole disadvantages individuals; does the fact of the lockdown aim at the utilitarian principle of greatest good of the greatest number infringe on the rights and wellbeing of individuals? such as those with present conditions unable to access care, such as migrants unable to reach homes. Ethically, in the case of asking patients to make a personal judgement of whether they are going through an emergency and coming to a decision about the immediacy of care that they need the healthcare system seems to have transferred the burden of ethical and technical decision making onto individuals. Furthermore, in implementing the lockdown asking migrant workers to bear with it, the state has chosen the utilitarian imperative. This is not to criticise the theory of lockdown which was almost a necessity to contain and slow down the transmission but rather to pose a question on 
\f3\i implementation
\f1\i0 , that implementation science is imbued with ethical and moral considerations, with distributive justice at heart, which needs careful deliberation. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 The presence of comorbidities therefore seems to raise many ethical challenges arising out of technical capacity and resource availability. In addition to the aforementioned dilemmas, in Italy for example: in deciding the distributive question, the guidelines suggest that \'93In addition to age, doctors and nurses are also advised to take a patient\'92s overall state of health into account\'85[as]... patients in a worse state of overall health could require a greater share of scarce resources to survive\'94 this is a deeply distressing, ethical call that 
\f3\i individuals
\f1\i0  who are already overworked, and emotionally stretched have to make.(4) In placing individuals whether healthcare workers, patients, and migrant workers in such a difficult position health systems seem to have acceded responsibility. This essay aims to partly break the ethical tension in talking about techniques and technologies of care that can be employed. \
Patients with chronic infectious and non-infectious conditions like HIV, tuberculosis and those requiring dialysis have been reported to struggle to access treatment as hospitals began scaling down their OPDs in response to COVID-19.(5) Previous experiences from Ebola suggest that such pandemics can have an impact on both healthcare provision as well as healthcare uptake especially in areas such as HIV, vaccination, ante and postnatal care, surgeries and consultations to list a few.(6) Another major challenge for most of these chronic conditions including mental health conditions is detection of new cases and access to medication. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Acute conditions\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 Medical emergencies such as bone fractures, burns, myocardial infarction, stroke, pregnancy and childbirth related complications, domestic abuse, seizures, anxiety, dental emergencies etc. require immediate medical attention, delay can be life-threatening. The print and social media has over the past several weeks highlighted the plight of several patients and their care-takers where they had to navigate a tortuous path visiting several facilities and being turned away or referred elsewhere to seek care for such emergencies. Denial of care and deaths due to cancer, cardiac arrests have been reported by the media and also gained attention on social media as one of the fallouts of the stringent lockdowns.(7) Like the issue of medication for chronic conditions the issue of availability of blood in blood banks for acute/ emergency conditions is an important requirement and can be a challenge with restricted mobility of blood donors.\
Issues faced while seeking care for acute or chronic conditions include - closure of public transport, restriction of use of private vehicles, availability of care providers at the facility and possibility to admit if required, food and water for patient and caretaker, having necessary prescriptions/ appointment confirmation/ pass to display to the police when traveling to and from the health facility. Therefore, it is not just that COVID-19 has repurposed or re-oriented the hospitals to care only for potentially infected patients, the lockdown has as well changed the dynamics of the healthcare system.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Privacy, Confidentiality, and Stigma \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 Artificial intelligence (AI) and app-based technologies are increasingly used to track hotspots, monitor, and understand the nature of COVID-19.  However, not having a robust data protection system in compliance with legal and ethical regulations could do more harm than good. The lockdown can lead to privacy and confidentiality of patients\'92 health data becoming public thus leading to 
\f3\i invasion
\f1\i0 , allowing for widespread 
\f3\i interpretation
\f1\i0 , 
\f3\i mass surveillance
\f1\i0 , and 
\f3\i targeted interventions
\f1\i0 , all of which can exacerbate the degree of stigma within and across communities. \
Healthcare workers, and those from vulnerable communities, are discriminated against, individuals are made scapegoats for the collective fear and anxiety regarding the spread of the infection. There have been a number of cases where healthcare workers have been harassed by their landlords or neighbors for working in the hospital setting.(8) Unfortunately, a 37 year old man died by suicide for being continually taunted by his community as it was presumed he was carrying the virus, indeed even after getting tested negative, the taunting did not stop.(9) Furthermore there are anecdotal instances where non-COVID patients who visited the hospital for treatment have been evicted by their house owners.  \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 Perhaps, it is time that we begin 
\f3\i to reflect on two critical aspects - preserving privacy while addressing COVID-19 and looking at social stigma as a public health problem
\f1\i0 . In the current context, visiting the healthcare system itself is leading to social ostracism. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Ways in which health systems can maintain essential services as well as cope with the additional burden of COVID-19 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 Using technology for consultations:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 As COVID-19 takes centrestage, use of technology precisely in the form of tele-consultations becomes a lifesaving tool. It can and is being used for both COVID and non-COVID queries as it minimises exposure risks to the patients and healthcare professionals. (10) Several international as well more contextual local guidance are available to implement tele-consultation and telemedicine. It provides an important way for an individual to be able to reach out to the medical professionals from the safety of their homes. All non COVID concerns can be addressed by tele-consultations starting from health care clinics in rural settings to tertiary care facilities.  For emergency services, it will help in \'93forward triage\'94 \'97 the sorting of patients before they arrive in the emergency department which reduces the exposure of health care professionals to COVID-19. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Improving preparedness of healthcare facilities:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 \
Restructuring of facilities to be able to cater to COVID and non COVID health needs is crucial to help maintain essential healthcare while minimising the chances of infection in the time of the pandemic. This could be achieved through physical/ infrastructural changes in the OPD and emergency care set-ups but also through contextualised implementable checklists.(11,12) \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Providing medicines at doorstep:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 MoHFW has issued a timely notification on March 26th 2020 specifying guidelines including the number of days of validity for prescriptions, geographical supply limits for sellers within the same revenue district and maintaining bill and details related to all transactions.(13)\super  \nosupersub This although helps many, the Internet and Mobile Association of India (IAMAI) expressed concerns over this as it might affect the online platforms.(14) Pharmeasy, Medlife, 1mg and Netmeds are examples of online startups that are intermediaries delivering medicines at the doorstep on uploading the prescription. The IAMAI highlights issues related to requirement of licenses, duration of 30 days validity for prescriptions related to chronic condition and geographical limits of sale by the licensee. The government should streamline this important component of healthcare to ensure adequate access and supply of medications to patients.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sb240\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Streamlining travel during the lockdown periods:
\f1\b0  \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 Governments should collaborate with cab and auto services to operate solely for emergency services thereby mitigating difficulty in accessing care. The Government can issue regulations with respect to requirements that the vehicles must have for safe travel such as the provision of hand sanitizers, with the driver and the customer to compulsorily wear masks, etc. Ola cabs for example in Haryana, and Bengaluru have initiated such an emergency service.  \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 Effective and transparent communication
\f1\b0  \
\
Misinformation in times of a pandemic can lead to fear and undesirable outcomes in the community. Ensuring communication at various levels within healthcare facilities, from the state and central governments, with the community is crucial. Use of existing secure video conferencing systems within the government machinery for administrative coordination as well as capacity building must be optimised. Clear, coherent, concise communication with staff on ground and regular meetings/ debriefs to check on the situation as well as the mental and physical health of staff should be made a routine. Optimizing existing systems such as short announcements by the waste collection trucks of key messages in local language is another low-cost method to reach every household. \
\
This article attempts to provide insights into how COVID-19 has impacted the Indian health system and what measures have been taken up proactively and what could be potential solutions and areas of focus for the coming days. As the health system adapts to cope with this pandemic it needs to be mindful to the several moral and ethical dilemmas that may occur during patient care, confront stigma related issues that would arise for patients as well as care providers, the vulnerable groups of population who may not be able to access healthcare but require it the most and conceptualize a post COVID era to be able to survive the storm and still sustain.\
\
\
\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b References:\
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 1.	\cf4 Madhav N, Oppenheim B, Gallivan M, et al. Pandemics: Risks, Impacts, and Mitigation. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al., editors. Disease Control Priorities: Improving Health and Reducing Poverty. 3rd edition. Washington (DC): The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank; 2017 Nov 27. Chapter 17.\'a0Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK525302/doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648-0527-1/pt5.ch17   \cf0 \
2.	\'93Enabling Delivery of Essential Health Services during the COVID 19 Outbreak Guidance note\'94, published on 14-04-2020; accessed on 16-04-2020. Available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/EssentialservicesduringCOVID19updated0411201.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/EssentialservicesduringCOVID19updated0411201.pdf}} \
3.	Kulkarni T. \cf6 Cancer patients worried as hospitals focus on COVID-19. \cf0 The Hindu 8\super th\nosupersub  April 2020 available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/cancer-patients-worried-as-hospitals-focus-on-covid-19/article31292061.ece/amp/"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \ul \ulc7 https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/cancer-patients-worried-as-hospitals-focus-on-covid-19/article31292061.ece/amp/}}\
4.	Mounk Y. The extraordinary decisions facing Italian Doctors. The Atlantic 11th March 2020 available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/who-gets-hospital-bed/607807/"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \ul \ulc7 https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/who-gets-hospital-bed/607807/}} \
5.	Johari A. India\'92s focus on coronavirus leave Tb and HIV patients adrift. Scroll 7\super th\nosupersub  April 2020 available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://scroll.in/article/958400/invisible-crisis-tb-and-hiv-patients-left-adrift-in-indias-focus-on-coronavirus"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 https://scroll.in/article/958400/invisible-crisis-tb-and-hiv-patients-left-adrift-in-indias-focus-on-coronavirus}} \
6.	Ribacke KJB, Saulnier DD, Eriksson A, Schreeb JV. Effects of the West Africa Ebola Virus Disease on Health-care Utilization \'96 A systematic review 2016. Frontiers in Public Health 4:222. Available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://dx.doi.org/10.3389%2Ffpubh.2016.00222"}}{\fldrslt \cf8 \ul \ulc8 10.3389/fpubh.2016.00222}}\
7.\cf7 	\cf0 Jain P. Heart attack patient denied treatment in Delhi. India today 8\super th\nosupersub  April 2020 available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/heart-attack-patient-denied-treatment-in-delhi-1664652-2020-04-08"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \ul \ulc7 https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/heart-attack-patient-denied-treatment-in-delhi-1664652-2020-04-08}}\cf7 \ul \ulc7  \
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \ulnone 8.	News18. Day after honouring doctors with claps, many in India are evicting them fearing Covid-19 24th March 2020 available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.news18.com/news/buzz/day-after-honouring-doctors-with-claps-many-in-india-are-evicting-them-fearing-covid-19-2548937.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \ul \ulc7 https://www.news18.com/news/buzz/day-after-honouring-doctors-with-claps-many-in-india-are-evicting-them-fearing-covid-19-2548937.html}} \
9.	Iyer AS. \'91Not anyone\'92s enemy\'92 suicide note of man targeted over Covid-19 13th April 2020 available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.thequint.com/news/india/mohammad-dilshad-suicide-himachal-pradesh-una-covid-19-suspicion"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \ul \ulc7 https://www.thequint.com/news/india/mohammad-dilshad-suicide-himachal-pradesh-una-covid-19-suspicion}} \
10.	Hollander JE, Carr BG. Virtually perfect? Telemedicine for Covid-19\
11.	Covid-19-PHC Action Group. COVID-19 Preparedness Checklist for Rural Primary Health Care and Community Settings. 2020 Apr 3:v1.1 Available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://iphindia.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/COVID-19-Preparedness-guidance_checklist-for-rural-Primary-Health-Care_Community-ealth-settings-in-India-v1-1.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 https://iphindia.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/COVID-19-Preparedness-guidance_checklist-for-rural-Primary-Health-Care_Community-ealth-settings-in-India-v1-1.pdf}}\cf9  \
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 12\cf9 . \cf0 COVID-19-PHC Action Group. COVID-19 Preparedness Checklist for Urban Primay Health Centres in in India. 2020 Apr 20:v1.0 Available at https://iphindia.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/COVID-19-Preparedness-Checklist-for-UPHCs-in-India-v1.0.pdf  \
13.	Notification regarding doorstep delivery of medications dated 26\super th\nosupersub  March 2020, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Doorstepdelivery26B.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \ul \ulc7 https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Doorstepdelivery26B.pdf}}\
14.	Mandavia M. Restrictions on online sale of drugs to hurt e-pharmacies, says IAMAI 30\super th\nosupersub  March 2020 Available at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/healthcare/biotech/healthcare/iamai-writes-to-health-ministry-against-new-rules-allowing-doorstep-delivery-of-medicines/articleshow/74896361.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst"}}{\fldrslt \cf10 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/healthcare/biotech/healthcare/iamai-writes-to-health-ministry-against-new-rules-allowing-doorstep-delivery-of-medicines/articleshow/74896361.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst}}\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Abstract\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \
In India, the COVID-19 pandemic has thrown open challenges at multiple fronts: (a) the reconfiguration of care in hospitals and other healthcare providers, in response to COVID-19, has led to many patients having to delay their treatment who are suffering non-COVID conditions, and (b) the lockdown which though necessary has, however, affected people unequally, some being more worse-off than others. This article unpacks the externalities of COVID-19 on healthcare systems in India by raising  moral and ethical questions about the plight of patients with other medical conditions while accessing care. This article also proposes a set of actions in which healthcare systems can address COVID and non-COVID related healthcare needs.\
\
}