{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 ArialUnicodeMS;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red11\green90\blue178;
\red163\green0\blue3;\red79\green128\blue189;\red63\green108\blue175;\red22\green176\blue240;\red251\green0\blue7;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c43922\c75294;
\cssrgb\c70588\c9020\c0;\cssrgb\c37647\c58039\c78824;\cssrgb\c30980\c50588\c74118;\cssrgb\c0\c74510\c95294;\cssrgb\c100000\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440
\hyphauto1\hyphfactor100
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa200\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2                                                               TITLE PAGE\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 1. Type of article: Original research\uc0\u8232 \
2. Article title: 
\f0\b Oral Health Inequities Among Children With Hearing Impairment In Hyderabad, India: A Cross-Sectional Study.
\f1\b0                                             
\f0\b \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa200\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 3. Author information: Laxmi Ramitha Koneti*,  Anitha C.T**\
* Dr.Laxmi Ramitha Koneti, BDS;  MPH  UGC-NET, JRF;                                                                   Contact details: laxmiramitha@gmail.com                                                                                             PhD scholar - Public Health, School of Medical Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Telangana, India.                                                                                                                                                   Author\'92s contributions: design of the study, data collection, analysis of data, and drafting the manuscript. \
**Dr.Anitha C.T, MBBS, MD, MPH.                                                                                                        Contact details: ctanitha@gmail.com, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:actmd@uohyd.ac.in"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul \ulc3 \strokec3 actmd@uohyd.ac.in}}                                                                       Associate professor, School of Medical Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Telangana, India.                                                                                                                                                   Author\'92s contributions: providing guidance throughout the study, conceptualization and design of the manuscript, review and revision of the manuscript.                            \
4. Corresponding author:  Dr.Anitha C.T\
5. Source of support:  No funding.\
6. Word count for abstract: 188\
7. Word count for text:   2,875 (excluding abstract, tables, references)\
8. Number of figures: 0\
9. Number of Tables: 4\
10. Number of pages:  15\
11. Conflict of interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ORAL HEALTH INEQUITIES AMONG CHILDREN WITH HEARING IMPAIRMENT IN HYDERABAD, INDIA: A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY.                                  
\f1\b0                                             
\f0\b \
Abstract:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 Oral health is one of the major aspects determining general health. Oral health is vital for all children, including children with special health care needs. The option of diagnosis, treatment and care should not be influenced by presence of disability, age, gender and socio-economic factors for children. The study aimed to assess oral health status of 105 children without hearing impairment(HI)
\f0\b  
\f1\b0 and 110 children with hearing impairment(CHI) in Hyderabad, India. American Dental Association Type 4 dental examination and modified WHO Oral Health Assessment form,1997 was used. Prevalence of dental caries was 26% and 69% among children without HI and CHI respectively. Good oral hygiene as determined by oral hygiene index scores was  81.9% in children without HI and 30% among CHI. 8.6% of children without HI and 2.7% of CHI reported dental visit in past 12 months. Dental caries prevalence and Oral Hygiene Index-Simplified scores among CHI and children without HI was statistically significant. Oral health status was unsatisfactory among CHI compared to children without HI. Oral health promotion is the need of the hour in general and among CHI in particular, requiring specific interventions and further research.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Keywords: 
\f1\b0 Children with hearing impairment(CHI), oral health status, dental caries, access to oral health, children with special healthcare needs.
\f0\b \
Introduction:
\f1\b0 \
Oral health is one of the major aspects determining general health as it is like a mirror that reflects general well-being of an individual(1,2). The World Health Organization (WHO) defines oral health as the state of mouth being free from any sort of conditions, diseases or disorders affecting the oral cavity(3). A healthy mouth enables an individual to speak, eat and socialize without any discomfort or embarrassment(4). Poor oral hygiene predisposes to some oral diseases like dental caries, gingivitis and periodontitis and is also related to major chronic diseases sharing common risk factors(2,5). Oral hygiene and personal hygiene are affordable form of preventive health measures. Yet, they are the most ignored in practice especially among children(2). The
\f0\b \cf5 \strokec5  
\f1\b0 \cf2 \strokec2 poor oral health among children has socio-developmental implications. Children are 12 times more likely to have restrained days of activity than those who have good oral health and are at higher risk of hospitalizations, emergency dental visits and decreased quality of life(4,6). Diagnosis, treatment and care should not be influenced by the presence of disability(7). \
Children have the right \'93to enjoy highest attainable standard of health and facilities for the treatment of illness and rehabilitation of health\'94 according to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. This includes access to quality health care(along with preventive care) and health education and information without any disparity(8). Oral health disparities in terms of accessibility as well as oral health outcomes in children are of ethical concern(9). As per Minority Health and Health Disparities Research and Education Act of 2000, U.S; health disparity population is that population which has disparity in disease incidence, prevalence, morbidity, mortality or survival rates than the general population(10). Oral health inequities among different population groups is considered unjust if it is due to unfair distribution of socially controllable factors that are affecting oral health(11). The prevalence rates of dental caries was 22.2% to 63.9% among children of varied age groups in different studies across India(12,13,14). The needs of Children with Special Healthcare Needs (CSHCN) are an important issue to be addressed who require special attention in medical as well as dental care(15). Oral health care among CSHCN is complex, unique, less explored and the greatest unmet health need calling for more awareness and education(1,7). Health care among CSHCN is least attended due to ignorance, fear, social stigma, traditions, socioeconomic status, misconception, negative attitudes. Practical difficulties during treatment, communication, being uncooperative, and underestimating the treatment needs also form hindrance(16).\cf6 \strokec6  \cf2 \strokec2 Hence, oral health is important for all children including CSHCN(1).
\f0\b \cf7 \strokec7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 \strokec2 Children with hearing impairment
\f0\b (
\f1\b0 CHI) are amongst the vital groups who are deprived of good oral health due to communication barriers. CHI is broadly used term to describe any degree of hearing loss in children ranging from mild(15\'9630dB) to profound(>95 dB)(17). Hearing impairment(HI) limits the chance of acquiring information which may significantly affect their personal health and hygiene practices(18). Children\'92s ability to learn, socialize, communicate and at times, their cognitive development may be affected(19). Hence HI has definite consequences on the personality development of a child. CHI\cf5 \strokec5  \cf2 \strokec2 face difficulty while communicating with others(20) including oral healthcare providers(21). Differential access to dental care, inadequate oral hygiene practices are various factors responsible for the differences in oral health among CHI(15). Previous studies have reported poor oral hygiene and high prevalence of dental caries- 65%-83.9% among CHI (17,22).
\f0\b \cf7 \strokec7 \

\f1\b0 \cf2 \strokec2 Studies have reported that adolescents and CHI have higher rates of oral diseases compared to their hearing counterparts in the population(18,23,24). The CHI cannot understand and appropriately respond to the instructions given. Hence, they may not be able to comprehend and adapt good oral hygiene practices(25). A recent study in Mumbai reported 98% of CHI had never visited a dentist(26). Mehta et al. reported CHI has more unmet oral health and treatment needs compared to children with intellectual disabilities, physical challenges or visual impairment in a study conducted in Delhi, India(27). Rawlani et al. have found prevalence of periodontal disease to be 49.64% among children with both hearing and speech impairment among 7 to 18 years attending special school in Anand-Wan, Warora, India(28). A comprehensive oral health survey was conducted in 2004 throughout India that reported prevalence of dental caries at 51.9% in children of 5 years, 53.8% in 12 years and 63.1% in 15 years(14). However, the inclusion of CSHCN in the study was not explicit. \
There is paucity of studies examining oral health status of CHI among adolescents. The study aimed to assess and compare the oral health status and treatment\cf4 \strokec4  \cf2 \strokec2 needs\cf4 \strokec4  \cf2 \strokec2 of\cf8 \strokec8  \cf2 \strokec2 CHI and children without HI in Hyderabad city of Telangana state, India.\
\pard\tqc\tx4680\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Materials and Methods: 	\
\pard\tqc\tx4680\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 A cross-sectional study was conducted during February - March 2019. Ethical clearance was obtained from the Institutional Research committee, University of Hyderabad.\
The study population included school going children without HI and CHI of 13-18 years age in Hyderabad, Telangana. Based on literature review, 65% was the prevalence of dental caries among CHI(17). Thereby, considering prevalence value as 65%, using the formula n = 4pq
\f0\b /
\f1\b0 L
\fs16\fsmilli8000 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  the sample size obtained was 105 for each group (CHI and children without HI). Two special schools (for CHI) and one government (regular) school were selected by purposive sampling. At each school, children of grade 7 to 10 giving assent alongside parental consent were included in the study. Permission to conduct the study was sought from the head of the institutions of selected schools. Children below 13 years and above 18 years; those with systematic diseases or conditions; who were unwilling or uncooperative or unable to cope up with oral examination procedure and those who were absent on the day of examination were excluded from the study. Informed consents, assents and oral health questionnaire were in English and Telugu. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Modified WHO oral health questionnaire for children and modified WHO Oral Health Assessment Form-1997 (29) was used to collect socio-demographic information and oral examination respectively. The oral health examination required the use of gloves, masks, disposable wooden tongue depressors, natural lighting and a chair. The study consisted of two components: Administration of oral health questionnaire and an oral screening.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 a. WHO Oral health questionnaire for children was modified by excluding questions on dietary habits and tobacco use. The teachers were briefed about the study and their assistance sought to administer the questionnaire. The teachers helped as interpreter to communicate the questions using sign language for CHI. \
b. The second component of oral screening was conducted by the investigator. American Dental Association (ADA) Type 4 oral examination- a Visual Dental Hygiene Screening(VDHS) was used in school setting where individual student was asked to sit on an ordinary chair and oral examination was carried out using a disposable wooden tongue depressor in the natural day lighting (illumination) available.                                                                                 \
Modified WHO Oral health assessment form-1997, 2004 was used to record the DMFT index (D-Decayed, M- Missing, F-Filled, T-Tooth), OHI-S (Oral Hygiene Index-Simplified) and Dean\'92s Fluorosis index. Treatment needs such as extraction of teeth, root canal treatment, restoration and ultrasonic scaling of teeth among examined children were recorded.                                                                                                                                        \
DMFT Index:  Cumulative index that indicates number of teeth decayed, missing due to caries and filled because of caries was used to determine prevalence of caries.                                                     OHI-S Index:  Has 2 components Debris Index-Simplified (DI-S) and Calculus Index-Simplified (CI-S). Each of these indices is based on numerical determinations representing amount of debris or calculus found on preselected tooth surfaces. Scores for  tooth surface of 6 index teeth were given as per the criteria (Upper right first molar, upper right central incisor, upper left first molar, lower left first molar, lower left central incisor, lower right first molar). Oral hygiene status was based on Greene and Vermillion's categorization of OHI(S) scores (Good: 0.0-1.2; Fair: 1.3-3.0; Poor: 3.1-6.0)(30). 
\f0\b    
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 DI-S score  and CI-S score was calculated = Total score for the 6 tooth surfaces/Number of surfaces examined\
                                                 OHI-S = DI-S  + CI-S
\f0\b                                                                                                                       \

\f1\b0 Data gathered was entered in Microsoft Excel 2010 and statistical analysis done using proportion and mean with standard deviation, z-test, Chi-square test and Fisher\'92s exact test. Statistical significance was set at p \uc0\u8804  0.05. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Results:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri274\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 A total of 215 children participated in the study. Children without HI were 105 and 110 were CHI. Table 1 shows sociodemographic characteristics of the children. Mean age of children without HI was 14.13\'b11.01years and for CHI it was 15.91\'b11.75years. There was statistically significant difference in male and female composition between both the groups(p=0.005). \
\pard\tx3195\tqr\tx9000\pardeftab720\ri274\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Table 2 shows the oral health practices among the children and has statistically significant difference between the two groups. Most of the children were not aware that oral health is a part of general health (57.1% children without HI and 80.9% of CHI)(p<0.001). 12.4% of children without HI and 3.6% of CHI had ever visited a dentist (p=0.02). Dental visit in the previous 12 months was reported by 8.6% of children without HI and 2.7% of CHI (p=0.67). 14.3% of the children without HI had some sort of pain or discomfort in their tooth in past 12 months but had never visited a dentist while this was 42.7% for the CHI (p=0.007).\
\pard\tx3195\tqr\tx9000\pardeftab720\ri274\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Table 3 shows the distribution of children with caries, fracture of front tooth and also their OHI-S interpretation. Prevalence of caries was significantly higher among CHI than children without HI(p<0.001). Statistically, there was no significant difference in caries prevalence between male and female children without HI (9.5% male, 17.1% female; p=0.43) and CHI (44.5% male, 24.5% female; p=0.25). It was observed from odds ratio that CHI had caries 6.14 times more than children without HI.\
z-test for the mean DMFT index scores and mean OHI-S scores for the two groups examined showed a statistically significant difference between the groups (p<0.0001) (Table 4). Prevalence of dental fluorosis was 15% and 12% respectively among children without HI and CHI (p=0.59).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri274\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The treatment needs for extraction of carious tooth, root canal treatment, restoration of decayed tooth and ultrasonic scaling that showed statistically significant difference between the groups (p <0.05). 43.8% of children without HI and 90.9% of CHI needed at-least one or the other treatment (Table 3).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri274\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Discussion:  \uc0\u8232 
\f1\b0 This cross sectional study assessed and compared oral health status and treatment needs among children without HI and CHI in Hyderabad, India. The prevalence of caries was 69.1% among the CHI and this finding was similar to the observations made by Sandeep V et al (17). The higher prevalence of caries among CHI could be due to communication barriers in propagating oral health education and even their condition hinders to express intensity of pain that may need intervention. The prevalence of caries among children without HI (26.7%) was closer to study findings of Hussaini et al(14). Inamdar I.F. et al(2) and Ingle et. al(31) reported higher prevalence rate of caries among children without HI than our present study. A Meta-analysis reported the mean prevalence of caries in India at 15 years as 60%(32) among children in general. In the present study dental caries status was higher among CHI than children without HI. This was similar to the study by Yazeed et al and Amit Sharma et al representing unattended oral health needs and negligence of care (21,33). This difference was also similar in a comparative study among CHI and children without HI by Kar et al using "Caries Assessment Spectrum and Treatment"(CAST) method(23). \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Mean Oral hygiene index-simplified scores seen in CHI was closer to the study findings by Shivakumar et al (15,34). However, Prasad et al. reported a lesser mean OHI-S score in CHI(35). Among dental treatment needs, ultrasonic scaling(69.1%) was the major treatment need among the CHI. Restoration of the decayed tooth(26.7%) was found to be the major treatment needed among the children without HI.\cf4 \strokec4  \cf2 \strokec2 In contrast, a study among government school children in Hyderabad reported ultrasound scaling (50.3%) as a major treatment need(36). \
Few studies have compared oral health (18,23,33) of CHI and children without HI and there were seldom any studies that assessed treatment needs among CHI. The study adds to existing evidence that oral health was better in children without HI than CHI. Such disparity in oral health among population groups shows oral health inequities at demographic level(37). Maintaining good oral hygiene is important to prevent dental problems such as caries and periodontal disease amongst children and these habits should become part of self-grooming from childhood(38).
\f0\b \

\f1\b0 Treatment seeking behaviors were poor in-spite of high prevalence of dental diseases(39) as also confirmed from the current study. Different pattern of oral diseases globally indicates the difference in existence of public preventive and restorative care(11). While hearing impairment is not considered as severe form of disability, it poses a growing public health problem and accounts for numerous disability adjusted life years (DALYs) lost, contributing to the global disease burden(40).\cf4 \strokec4  \cf2 \strokec2 This study demonstrates CHI have unmet oral health needs and there is lack of access to oral health care underscoring the existing health inequities among CSHCN in terms of age and hearing impairment. Everyone should have equitable access to services that promote and revive their normal oral/dental functioning(11). As per ADA Principles of Ethics, justice in a broad sense is that dental profession along with society should unitedly work to improve access for dental care for everyone(41). Studies have shown that oral hygiene among CSHCN can be improved significantly by providing intensified daily brushing by caregivers/care-providers, by the development of self-help workshops, by providing effective staff training, or by a combination of all these approaches(42). Promotional videos on oral hygiene maintenance especially with sign language demonstration would be helpful for CHI. Equitable access and resource distribution among adolescent groups is needed to resolve the inequity issues fairly in order to promote and restore oral health. Preventive oral health measures should not be neglected favoring the curative measures(11). CDC, Healthy People 2010 and Health 2020 have objectives to address issues of oral health disparities requiring scientific inquiry into determinants that would help eliminate disparities(43). Data on the prevalence and distribution of oral health problems helps understand dental health practices among most vulnerable populations and aids in formulation of oral health policies and appropriate programs. Such policies and programs would facilitate in creating awareness with respect to preventive and promotive aspects of oral health and to generate the required resources to meet the needs of vulnerable children(44). Oral health care can be enhanced by oral health education propagated by teachers in the classroom sessions. Continuous monitoring of oral health status, especially for CHI, would reduce the risk of oral diseases. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The study considered adolescent children 13-18 years of age as they have distinct needs due to high caries activity and periodontal disease, tendency for poor nutritional habits and less attention to oral hygiene practices. Data reveals gender disparities for enrolment in special schools for CHI. A regular classroom comprised more female than male  while the number of male(60.9%) outnumbered female(39%) in school for CHI. Studies assessing oral health status among CHI and other CSHCN schools in India reported similar male majority (1,27,42) while this was contrary in Iraq with more number of female in CHI schools(45). This difference in gender composition at special schools in India may be due to male preference and reluctance to spend on the girl child needing special school (27). As per UNESCO report, 2019; there is high chance for a girl child with disability to get excluded from enrolment in schools in India because of gender prejudices in addition to her disability. Though the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities highlights about inclusive education for CSHCN, it remains silent about gender equity(46).\uc0\u8232 \
Similar studies with a larger sample would provide better understanding of oral health care needs of CHI in low middle income countries. Qualitative studies will help to get the perspectives of teachers and parents regarding oral health of the CHI and barriers to avail oral health services. Research from gender perspective among CHI would confirm differential access to special schools among adolescent boys and girls and access to oral health care.                                                                                                                                                       The study had limitations due to time constraint. Oral examination was carried out using wooden tongue depressors which is usually not helpful to assess gingival health. Data on degree of hearing impairment among CHI was not collected. Communication was a barrier although teachers were the interpreters for CHI.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Conclusion:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 The present study demonstrates that CHI have higher prevalence of dental caries than children without HI. The study findings show that oral health promotion is needed to help nurture good oral health practices among children in general and CHI in particular. The high prevalence of caries among CHI represents unattended dental needs and oral health inequities in Hyderabad, Telangana. CHI require specific interventions and further research to evolve comprehensive oral health care policy that is inclusive of CSHCN.
\f0\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf2 Funding: 
\f1\b0 No external funding.\

\f0\b Conflicts of interest: 
\f1\b0 There are no competing interests.\

\f0\b Acknowledgement: 
\f1\b0 The authors thank Dr.Pravin Pisudde (Associate Professor, Department of Community Medicine, ESIC Medical college and hospital, Hyderabad, India) and Dr.KL.Girish Babu (Professor and Head, Department of Dentistry, Hassan Institute of Medical Sciences, India) for providing inputs and reviewing the draft version. The authors are thankful to the children, parents and the school staff involved with this study. The authors thank the School of Medical Sciences, University of Hyderabad for the support and encouragement. 
\f0\b \cf9 \strokec9 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri278\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \strokec2 References:\
\pard\tx384\pardeftab720\li384\fi-384\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 1. 	Vaishnavi. S, Preetha Elizabeth Chaly, Shalini.P, Nijesh, Indra Priyadarshni.V. Oral health care awareness among differently abled children attending special schools in Chennai. Int J Community Public Health Dent. 2015 Jun;5(1). \
\pard\tx384\pardeftab720\li384\fi-384\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 2. 	Inamdar I.F, Mohammed Ubaidulla, Saleem H. Tambe, Doibale M.K, Aswar N.R. Study of oral health among adolescents in the field practice area of Urban health training centre, Nanded, India. IOSR J Dent Med Sci. 2013;8(6):26\'9630. \
3. 	World Health Organisation. Available from: https://www.afro.who.int/health-topics/oral-health.\
4. 	Nalli S, Bindiganavale S, Chowdary B. A study of oral health promotion activities in India. Int J Community Med Public Health. 2016;3(8):2270\'964. \
5. 	Links between oral health and general health- 
\f2\i the case for action
\f1\i0 . Dental Health Services Victoria; 2011. \
6. 	Rahman NA, Yusoff A, Daud MK, Noor F. Salivary parameters, dental caries experience and treatment needs of hearing-impaired children in a special school for deaf in Kelantan, Malaysia. Arch Orofac Sci. (2015), 10(1): 17-23.:7. \
7. 	Biris C, Bud E, Ormenian A, Lazar AP, Pop D, Yero Eremie LM, et al. Ethical Considerations In Dental Care For People With Developmental Disabilities. Acta Medica Marisiensis. 2016;62(2):276\'969. \
8. 	The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. www.unicef.org.uk; \
9. 	Mouradian WE. Ethical Principles and the Delivery of Children\'92s Oral Health Care. Ambul Pediatr. 2002;2:162\'968. \
10. 	Darshana B, Nandita K. Health disparity with light on oral health inequality - A review. SRM J Res Dent Sci. 2014;5(4):258. \
11. 	Naidoo S. Ethical Considerations in Community Oral Health. J Dent Educ. 2015;79(Suppl 5):S38-44. \
12. 	Parasuraman G, Gowtham Krishna Y, Kaviya M, Jain NA, Rajendran P, Dutta R. A study on the prevalence of dental caries among the school-going children in Tamil Nadu. Int J Community Med Public Health. 2017 Oct;4(10):3582\'969. \
13. 	Dubey H, Gupta R, Ingle N, Kaur N. Prevalence of dental caries among school children of Bharatpur city, India. J Int Soc Prev Community Dent. 2014;4(1):52. \
14. 	Hussaini S, Bendigiri N, Swati I. A study on the dental problems of school children. Int J Community Med Public Health. 2016;3(5):1090\'963. \
15. 	Shivakumar K, Patil S, Kadashetti V. Oral health status and dental treatment needs of sensory-impaired children of Satara District, India. J Int Oral Health. 2017;9(5):197. \
16. 	Seby J.Gardens et al. Oral health survey of 6-12-year-old children with disabilities attending special schools in Chennai, India. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2014 Nov;24(6):424\'9633. \
17. 	Sandeep V, Kumar M, Vinay C, Chandrasekhar R, Jyostna P. Oral health status and treatment needs of hearing impaired children attending a special school in Bhimavaram, India. Indian J Dent Res. 2016;27(1):73. \
18. 	Vichayanrat, Kositpumivate. Oral health conditions and behaviors among hearing impaired and normal hearing college students at Ratchasuda college, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2014;45(5):8. \
19. 	Samnieng P. Dental Cares for Patients Who Have a Hearing Impairment. Int J Clin Prev Dent. 2014 Dec 30;10(4):215\'968. \
20. 	Singh R, Agrawal R, Murawat K. Dental care for the deaf pediatric patient. Indian J Otol. 2012;18(4):171. \
21. 	Yazeed Al-Qahtan, Hashim Al-Naser, Dhya Al-Nahawi, Fawaz Al-Tuwaijri, Mujtaba Al-Abdullati, Thikriat Al-Jewair. Dental Caries Prevalence and Severity among Deaf and Hearing Impaired Male Students in Eastern Saudi Arabia. Adv Dent Oral Health. 2017; 5(2): 555658.\
22. 	Jain M, Mathur A, Kumar S, Dagli RJ, Duraiswamy P, Kulkarni S. Dentition status and treatment needs among children with impaired hearing attending a special school for the deaf and mute in Udaipur, India. J Oral Sci. 2008;50(2):161\'965. \
23. 	Kar S, Kundu G, Maiti S, Ghosh C, Bazmi B, Mukhopadhyay S. A comparative evaluation of dental caries status among hearing-impaired and normal children of Malda, West Bengal, evaluated with the Caries Assessment Spectrum and Treatment. J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent. 2016;34(4):306. \
24. 	Siddiqui FA. Access to oral health care for persons who are d/Deaf in Montreal: A focused ethnography. [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]: McGill University; 2016. \
25. 	Jnaneswar A, Subramaniya G, Pathi J, Jha K, Suresan V, Kumar G. Assessment of dental caries and periodontal status in institutionalized hearing impaired children in Khordha District of Odisha. J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent. 2017;35(3):203\'968. \
26. 	Shetty D, Gupta B, Patil A, Mali S. Oral health status of hearing impaired individuals in a school in Vashi, Navi Mumbai. Int J Prev Clin Dent Res. 2019;6(4):80. \
27. 	Mehta A, Gupta R, Mansoob S, Mansoori S. Assessment of oral health status of children with special needs in Delhi, India. RSBO. 2015 Jul-Sep;12(3):244-51:8. \
28. 	Shivlal Rawlani, Shobha Rawlani, Mukta Motwani, Rahul Bhowte, Rakhi Baheti, Shivkumar. Oral Health Status of Deaf and Mute Children Attending Special School in Anand-Wan, Warora, India. J Kor Dent Sci. 2010;3(2):20\'965. \
29. 	Oral Health Surveys Basic Methods. 5th ed. France: World Health Organization; 2013. \
30. 	Peter S. Essentials of Public Health Dentistry. 5th ed. New Delhi, India: Arya Medi Publishing House Pvt. Ltd.; 2014. \
31. 	Ingle N, Dubey HV, Kaur N, Gupta R. Prevalence of dental caries among school children of Bharatpur city, India. J Int Soc Prev Community Dent. 2014;4(1):52. \
32. 	Janakiram C, Antony B, Joseph J, Ramanarayanan V. Prevalence of Dental Caries in India among the WHO Index Age Groups: A Meta-Analysis. J Clin Diagn Res. 2018 Aug;12(8). \
33. 	Dr. Amit Sharma, Dr. Mandar Todkar, Dr. Hemal Pandya, Dr. Mukesh Panwar, Dr. Mayank Das. Comparison of oral health status and DMFT score of special children and normal children in Burhanpur city. Int J Appl Dent Sci. 2019;5(1):219\'9622. \
34. 	Shivakumar K, Raje V, Kadashetti V. Dental caries experience and oral hygiene status among hearing and speech impaired children of Karad city, Maharashtra, India. J Int Oral Health. 2018;10(6):283. \
35. 	Prasad M, Patthi B, Singla A, Gupta R, Niraj LK, Ali I. Special Care with Special Child
\f3 \uc0\u8209 
\f1 Oral Health Status of Differently Abled Children Attending Special Schools in Delhi: A Cross
\f3 \uc0\u8209 
\f1 Sectional Study. J Indian Assoc Public Health Dent. 2018;16(2):7. \
36. 	Reddy ER, Rajababu P, Patil PU, Sultana S, Reddy PP, Ramprasad SV. A Study on the Dental Health of Urban Government School Children in Telangana. Int J Contemp Med Res. 2019;6(4):D20\'964. \
37. 	Ankur Singh. Societal determinants of oral health inequalities in Asia\'96Pacific: Commentary. Nat India. 2017 Feb;(Special Issue):S5\'966. \
38. 	Tugeman H, Rahman NA, Daud MK, Yusoff A. Effect of oral health education programme on oral health awareness and plaque maturity status among hearing-impaired children. Arch Orofac Sci. 2018;13(1):22\'9635. \
39. 	Bhatnagar N, Mohindroo A, Verma H, Aggarwal A. Inequity in dental care utilisation: what gets delivered gets known - evidence from Chandigarh and Haryana. Int J Community Med Public Health. 2014;1(1):44\'967. \
40. 	Kodali PB, Ct Anitha, Kopparty S. Understanding Hearing Impairment in Individuals from a Perspective of Social and Emotional Functioning. Disabil CBR Incl Dev. 2016 Jun 7;27(1):92\'96108. \
41. 	Nash DA. Developing a Pediatric Oral Health Therapist to Help Address Oral Health Disparities Among Children. J Dent Educ. 2004;68(1):13. \
42. 	Manish Jain, Bharadwaj SP, Kaira LS, Devendra Chopra, Duraiswamy Prabu, Suhas Kulkarni. Oral Health Status and Treatment Need Among Institutionalised Hearing-Impaired and Blind Children and Young Adults in Udaipur, India. A Comparative Study. OHDM. 2013;12(1). \
43. 	J.Y. Lee, K. Divaris. The Ethical imperative of Addressing Oral Health Disparities: A unifying framework. Int Am Assoc Dent Res. 2014;93(3):224\'9630. \
44. 	JR Sukhabogi, CBR Shekar, IA Hameed, IV Ramana, G Sandhu. Oral Health Status among 12- and 15-Year-Old Children from Government and Private Schools in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India. Ann Med Health Sci Res. Sep-Oct2014;4(Suppl 3). \
45. 	Hamad AM, Ali SH, Arif AN, Zardawi FM. Oral Health Status of Deafness Persons in Sulaimani city-Iraq. IOSR J Dent Med Sci IOSR-JDMS. 2015;14(9):5. \
46. 	State of the Education Report for India 2019 Children with Disabilities. UNESCO, New Delhi; 2019. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Legends\
Tables\
1.	Table 1: Sociodemographic characteristics of the children\
2.	Table 2:  Oral Health Practices among children without HI and CHI\
3.	Table 3: Oral health and treatment needs among children without HI and CHI \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 4.	Table 4: Comparison of mean DMFT index and OHI-S index scores among the children. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2                            Table 1: Sociodemographic characteristics of the children\

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight680 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight680 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight680 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight680 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight680 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2          Variables
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Children without    \
      HI (n=105)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2     %
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    CHI (n=110)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      %
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Age:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 13.0-14.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             73
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    69.5
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            31
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    28.2
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 15.0-16.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             29
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   27.6
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            34
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    30.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 17.0-18.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2              3
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    2.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            45
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    40.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Sex:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Male
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             44
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   41.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             67
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    60.9
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Female
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             61
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   58.1
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             43
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    39.1
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8520\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Occupation of the parent:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight1000 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight1000 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight1000 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight1000 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight1000 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Non skilled worker (Peon, Labourer, Farmer)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            39
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    37.1
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            47
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    42.7
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight1020 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight1020 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight1020 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight1020 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight1020 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Skilled worker (Carpenter, Mason, driver)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            51
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    48.6
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2             63
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   57.3
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2360\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1880\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1900\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth860\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Others
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            15
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    14.3
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2              -
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\li546\fi-546\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li438\fi-438\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li330\fi-330\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li222\fi-222\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 \
\
\pard\tx1335\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2            Table 2:  Oral Health Practices among children without HI and CHI\

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Oral Health Practices 
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Children without HI (n=105)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    CHI   \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2  (n=110)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   Total (N=215)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 p value (Chi-square test)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Frequency of brushing daily:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Sometimes
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        5 (4.8%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   9 (8.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   14 (6.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 0.00569
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Once
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      78 (74.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 94 (85.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  172 (80%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Twice
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      22 (20.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   7 (6.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  29 (13.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Time taken for brushing :
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 About a minute
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      9 (8.6%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 37 (33.6%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  46 (21.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 <0.0001*
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 2minutes
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    16 (15.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 16 (14.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  32 (14.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 More than 2 minutes
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    79 (75.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 37 (33.6%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 116 (53.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Don't know
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       1 (1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 20 (18.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  21 (9.8%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Frequency of changing toothbrush:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight2320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Once in a month
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 54 (51.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 63 (57.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 117 (54.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa240\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 <0.0001*
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight2320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Every 2 months
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 32 (30.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 3 (2.7%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 35 (16.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight2320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Every 3months
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 11 (10.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 11 (10%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 22 (10.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight2320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Every 6months
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 8 (7.6%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 23 (20.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 31 (14.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight2320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 More than 6 months
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2            -
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 10 (9.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 10 (4.7%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8700\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Rinsing after every meal:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight940 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Yes
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 21 (20%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 39 (35.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 60 (27.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 0.011558
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2800\clftsWidth3 \clheight440 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight440 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1180\clftsWidth3 \clheight440 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight440 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth940\clftsWidth3 \clheight940 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 No
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 84 (80%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 71 (64.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 155 (72.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 
\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2         
\f1\b0 Statistical significance p \uc0\u8804  0.05       \
        *Fisher\'92s exact test \
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\fs22 \cf2 \
    \
           
\f0\b\fs24 Table 3: Oral health and treatment needs among children without HI and CHI 
\f1\b0 \

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight1360 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Children without HI (n=105)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2     \
    CHI (n=110)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       \
      Total\
   (N=215)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2    p value\
(Chi-square test) 
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Caries status :
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight940 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Caries free
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      77(73.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       34(30.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   111(51.6%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2    < 0.001
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight940 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Caries present
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      28(26.7%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       76(69.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   104(48.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Fracture of front tooth :
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight940 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Yes
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       11(10.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2         6(5.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2     17(7.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  \
   0.172583
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight940 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 No
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       94(89.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      104(94.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   198(92.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 OHI-S score interpretation:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight1500 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Good
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        86(81.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        33(30%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   119(55.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
   <0.0001*
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight1500 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Fair
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        18(17.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        69(62.7%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    87(40.4%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight1500 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Poor
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        1(1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2         8(7.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       9(4.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth8460\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Treatment needs:
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Extraction
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       1 (1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    12 (10.9%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      13(6.04%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   0.0027*
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Root canal treatment
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2        7(6.7%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    35 (31.8%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      42(19.5%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2   <0.001
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight380 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Restoration
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      28(26.7%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2     65(59.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      93(43.3%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    <0.001
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1540\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx1728
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1700\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx3456
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1800\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx5184
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1440\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6912
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1260\clftsWidth3 \clheight620 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Ultrasonic scaling
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       19(18%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2     76(69.1%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx3195\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      95(44.2%)
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    <0.001 
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2             Statistical significance p \uc0\u8804  0.05\
          *Fisher\'92s exact test\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Table 4:Comparison of mean DMFT index and OHI-S index scores among the children.
\f1\b0 \

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1760\clftsWidth3 \clheight660 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight660 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight660 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1920\clftsWidth3 \clheight660 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2     Indices
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Children without HI (n=105)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2     CHI (n=110)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2    p value (z-test)
\f4\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1760\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvmgf \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1920\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Mean DMFT 
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       0.4 \'b1 0.72  
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      1.14 \'b1 0.95
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2       \
       <0.0001*
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1760\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1920\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Mean DI-S
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      0.23 \'b1 0.32
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      0.75 \'b1 0.31
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1760\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1920\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Mean CI-S
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2       0.2 \'b1 0.36
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      0.97 \'b1 0.84
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1760\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2120\clftsWidth3 \clheight320 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvmrg \clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1920\clftsWidth3 \clheight1820 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt80 \clpadl80 \clpadb80 \clpadr80 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Mean OHI-S
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      0.43 \'b1 0.62
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2      1.66 \'b1 0.84
\f4 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2            
\f0\b  
\f1\b0 Statistical significance p \uc0\u8804  0.05   \
           *p value was <0.0001 for mean of each indices     \
\
\
                                                                                                                                                                        }